---
title: "The Self-Calibrating Tilt Accelerometer: A Method for Observing Tilt and Correcting Drift With a Triaxial Accelerometer"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2024-SCTA
excerpt: 'We develop a new, highly precise tiltmeter based on three mutually orthogonal accelerometers that can be rotated into the vertical to calibrate against the acceleration due to local gravity. These calibrations correct the horizontal tilt measurements for artificial signals generated within the sensors, yielding reliable measurements of the tilt of the ground surface.'
date: 2024-10-01
venue: 'Earth and Space Science'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1029/2024EA003909'
citation: 'Fredrickson, E. K., Wilcock, W. S. D., Harrington, M. J., Cram, G., Tilley, J., Martin, D., & Burnett, J. (2024). &quot;The Self-Calibrating Tilt Accelerometer: A Method for Observing Tilt and Correcting Drift With a Triaxial Accelerometer.&quot; <i>Earth and Space Science</i>. 11.'
---
> We present observations from two field deployments of a calibrated tiltmeter that we name the Self-Calibrating Tilt Accelerometer (SCTA). The tiltmeter is based upon a triaxial quartz crystal accelerometer; the horizontal channels measure tilt and are periodically rotated into the vertical to obtain a measurement of the acceleration of gravity. Changes in the measured total acceleration are ascribed to drift in the vertical channel and used as calibrations for removing that same drift from the tilt time series observed between calibrations. Changes in the span (sensitivity) of the accelerometer channels can also be measured by calibrating them pointing up and down. A 3-year test on the seafloor at Axial Seamount show that the calibrations are consistent with a linear-exponential model of drift to a RMS residual of ~0.5 μg (μrad). The calibrated tilt time series was impacted by platform settling for the first 2 years, but after repositioning the tiltmeter, the calibrated observations were consistent for the final year with the tilt observed on a nearby LILY tiltmeter, within an assumed level of drift for the unconstrained LILY sensor. A separate 15-month test in a stable vault at Piñon Flat Observatory was complicated by seasonal temperature variations of >5°C; the calibrations are consistent with a linear-exponential model of drift to ~2 μg RMS when temperature and temperature time-derivative dependence is included. Similarly, the calibrated tilt time series was impacted by thermal deformation of the SCTA assembly. A future test in a thermally and tectonically stable borehole will be required to assess the accuracy of the SCTA.

[Full-text download](http://erikfred.github.io/files/papers/Fredrickson-et-al_2024.pdf)
<br/>[Supplement](http://erikfred.github.io/files/papers/Fredrickson-et-al_2024_s01.pdf)